arXiv:1912.05752v1 [cs.LG] 12 Dec 2019 The Use of Deep Learning for Symbolic Integration A Review of (Lample and Charton, 2019) Ernest Davis Dept.
of Computer Science New York University New York, NY 10012 davise@cs.nyu.edu December 13, 2019 Abstract Lample and Charton (2019) describe a system that uses deep learning technology to compute symbolic, indeﬁnite integrals, and to ﬁnd symbolic solutions to ﬁrst- and second-order ordinary diﬀerential equations, when the solutions are elementary functions.
They found that, over a particular test set, the system could ﬁnd solutions more successfully than sophisticated packages for symbolic mathematics such as Mathematica run with a long time-out.
However, some important categories of examples are not included in their corpus and have not been tested.
Some of these categories are certainly outside the scope of their system.
Overall their system is entirely dependent on pre-existing, sophisticated, software for symbolic mathematics; it does not constitute any kind of triumph of deep learning methods over symbolic methods.
Lample and Charton (2019) describe a system (henceforth LC) that uses deep learning technology to compute symbolic, indeﬁnite integrals, and to ﬁnd symbolic solutions to ﬁrst- and second-order ordinary diﬀerential equations, when the solutions are elementary functions (i.e.
compositions of the arithmetic operators with the exponential and trigonometric functions and their inverses).
They found that, over a particular test set, LC could ﬁnd solutions more successfully than sophisticated packages for symbolic mathematics such as Mathematica given a long time-out.
This is an impressive accomplishment; however, it is important to understand its scope and limits.
We will begin by discussing the case of symbolic integration, which is simpler.
Our discussion of ODE’s is much the same; however, that introduces technical complications that are largely extrane- ous to the points we want to make.
1 Symbolic integration There are three categories of computational symbolic mathematics that are important here: • Symbolic diﬀerentiation.
Using the standard rules for diﬀerential calculus, this is easy to program and eﬃcient to execute.
• Symbolic integration This is diﬃcult.
In most cases, the integral of an elementary function that is not extremely simple is not, itself, an elementary function.
In principle, the decision 1
problem whether the integral of an elementary function is itself elementary is undecidable (Richardson, 1969).
Even in the cases where the integral is elementary, ﬁnding it can be very diﬃcult.
Nonetheless powerful modules for symbolic integration have been incorporated in systems for symbolic math like Mathematica, Maple, and Matlab.
• Simpliﬁcation of symbolic expressions.
The decision problem of determining whether an elementary expression is identically equal to zero is undecidable (Richardson, 1969).
Symbolic math platforms incorporate powerful modules, but but building a high-quality system is a substantial undertaking.
If one can, in one way or another, conjecture that the integral of elementary function f is elementary function g (both functions being speciﬁed symbolically) then verifying that conjecture involves, ﬁrst computing the derivative h = f ′ and, second, determining that the expression h −g simpliﬁes to 0.
As we have stated, the ﬁrst step is easy; the second step is hard in principle but often reasonably straightforward in practice.
Given an elementary expression f, ﬁnding an elementary symbolic integral is, in general, a search in an enormous and strange state space for something that most of the time does not even exist.
Even if you happen to know that it exists, as is the case with the test examples used by Lample and Charton, it remains a very hard problem.
2 What LC does and how it works At a high level, LC works as follows: • A large corpus of examples (80 million) was created synthetically by generating random, com- plex pairs of symbolic expressions and their derivatives.
We will discuss below how that was done.
• A seq2seq transformer model is trained on the corpus.
• At testing time, given a function g to integrate, the model was executed, using a beam search of width either 1, 10, or 50.
An answer f produced by the model was checked using the procedure described above: the symbolic diﬀerentiator was applied to f, and then the symbolic simpliﬁer tested whether f ′ = g.
In eﬀect, the process of integration is being treated as something like machine translation: the source is the integrand, the target is the integral.
Three techniques were used to generate integral/derivative pairs: • Forward generation (FWD).
Randomly generate a symbolic function; give it to a preexisting symbolic integrator; if it ﬁnds an answer, then record the pair.
20 million such pairs were created.
This tends to generate pairs with comparatively small derivative and large integrals, in terms of the size of the symbolic expression.
• Backward generation (BWD).
Randomly generate a symbolic function; compute its deriva- tive; and record the pair.
40 million such pairs were created.
The form of the derivative is simpliﬁed by symbolic techniques before the pair is recorded.
This approach tends to generate pairs with comparatively small integrals and derivatives that are almost always much larger.
• Integration by parts (IBP).
If, for some functions f and G, LC has computed that the integral of f is F and that the integral of the product fG = H, then, by the rule of integration by parts.
Z Fg = FG −H It can now record Fg and its integral as a new pair.
20 million such pairs were created.
The comparisons to Mathematica, Maple, and Matlab were carried out using entirely items generated by BWD, They found that LC was able to solve a much higher percentage of this test set than Mathematica, Maple, or Matlab giving an extended time out to all of these.
Mathematica, the highest scoring of these, was able to solve 84% of the problems in the test set, whereas, running with a beam size of 1, LC produced the correct solution 98.4% of the time.
3 No integration without simpliﬁcation!
There are many problems where it is critical to simplify an integrand before carrying out the process of integration.
Consider the following integral: Z sin2(eex) + cos2(eex) dx (1) At ﬁrst glance, that looks scary, but in fact it is just a “trick question” that some malevolent calculus teacher might pose.
The integrand is identically equal to 1, so the integral is x + c.
Obviously, one can spin out examples of this kind to arbitrary complexity.
Anyway, rule-based symbolic systems can and do quite easily carry out a sequence of transformations to do the simpliﬁcation here This raises two issues: • It is safe to assume that few examples of this form, of any signiﬁcant complexity, were included in Lample and Charton’s corpus.
BWD and IBP cannot possibly generate these.
FWD could, in principle, but the integrand would have to be generated at random, which is extremely improbable.
Therefore, LC was not tested on them.
• Could LC have found a solution to such a problem if it were tested on one?
The answer to that question is certainly yes, if the test procedure begins by applying a high quality simpliﬁer and reduces the integrand to a simple form.
Alternatively, the answer is also yes if, with integral (1), LC proposes “f(x) = x” as a candidate solution then the simpliﬁer veriﬁes that, indeed, f ′ is equal to the complex integrand.
It does seem rather unlikely that LC, operating on the integrand in equation (1), would propose f(x) = x as a candidate.
If one were to construct a problem where a mess like integral (2) has some moderately complicated solution — say, log(x2/ sin(x)) — which, of course, is easily 3
done, the likelihood that LC will ﬁnd it seems still smaller; though certainly there is no way to know until you try.
Fran¸cois Charton informs me (personal communication) that in fact LC did not do simpliﬁcations at this stage and therefore would not have been able to solve these problem.
This is not a serious strike against their general methodology.
The problem is easily ﬁxed; they can add easily add calls to the simpliﬁer at the appropriate steps, and they could automatically generate examples of this kind for their corpus by using an “ugliﬁer” that turns simple expressions into equivalent complicated ones.
But the point is that there a class of problems whose solution inherently requires a high quality simpliﬁer, and which currently is not being tested.
One might object that problems of this form are very artiﬁcial.
But the entire problem that LC addresses is very artiﬁcial.
If there is any natural application that tends to generate lots of problems of integrating novel complicated symbolic expressions with the property that a signiﬁcant fraction of those have integrals that are elementary functions, I should like to hear about it.
As far as I know, the problem is purely of mathematical interest.
Another situation where simpliﬁcation is critical: Suppose that you take an integrand produced by BWD and make some small change.
Almost certainly, the new function f has no elementary integral.
LC will produce an answer g, because it always produces an answer, and that answer will be wrong, because there is no right answer.
In a situation where you actually cared about the integral of f, it would be undesirable to accept g as an answer.
So you can add a check; you diﬀerentiate g and check whether g′ = f.
But now you are checking for the equivalence of two very complicated expressions, and again you would need a very high-powered simpliﬁer.
4 Diﬀerential equations Lample and Charton have developed a very ingenious technique in which you can input any elemen- tary function f(x, c) with a single occurrence of parameter c, and ﬁnd a an ODE whose solution is f(x, c) where c is the free parameter of the integral.
They also can do the corresponding thing for second-order equations.
Their overall procedure was then essentially the same as for integrals: They generated a large corpus of pairs of equations and solutions, and trained a seq2seq neural network.
At testing time, LC used the neural network to carry out a beam search which generated candidates; each candidate was tested to see whether it was a solution to the problem.
Here the results were more mixed.
With ﬁrst-order equations, LC with a beam size of 1 comes out slightly ahead of Mathematica (81.2% to 77.2%) with a beam size of 50, it comes out well ahead (97%).
With second order equations, LC with a beam size of 1 does not do as well as Mathematica (40.8% to 61.6%) but with a beam size of 50 it attains 81.0%.
The concerns that we have raised in the context of integration apply here as well, suitably adapted.
5 Special functions Systems such as Mathematica, Maple, and Matlab are able to solve symbolically many symbolic integration problems and many diﬀerential equations in which the solution is a special function (i.e.
a non-elementary function with a standard name).
For instance Mathematica can integrate the 4
function log(1 −x/x) to get the answer −PolyLog(2,x), It can solve the equation x2 + y′′(s) + xy′(x) + (x2 −16)y(x) = 0 to ﬁnd the solution y(x) = c1BesselJ(4, x) + c2BesselY(4, x) In principle, LC could be extended to handle these.
In FWD, it would be a matter of including the pairs where the automated integrator being called generates an expression with a special function.
In BWD, it would be a matter of generating expressions with special functions and computing their derivatives.
With integration, the impact on performance might be small; special functions that are integrals of elementary functions are mostly unary (though PolyLog is binary), and therefore have only a moderate impact on the size of the state space.
But the ODE solver is a diﬀerent matter; many of the functions that arise in solving ODEs, such as the many variants of Bessel functions, are binary, and adding expressions that include these expands the search space exponentially.
To put the point another way: When the ODE solver was tested, Mathematica was searching through a space of solutions that are includes the special functions, whereas LC was limited to the much smaller space of the elementary functions.
The tests were designed so that the solution was always in the smaller space.
LC thus had an entirely unfair advantage.
6 The Test Set There are also issues with the test set.
The comparison with Mathematica, Matlab, and Maple used a test set consisting entirely of problems generated by BWD (problems generated by FWD by deﬁnition can be solved by symbolic integrators).
These inevitably tend to have comparatively small integrals (in expression size) and long integrals.
Unless you are very lucky, or unless an expression is full of addition and subtraction, the derivative of an expression of size n has length Ω(n2).
For example the derivative of the function sin(sin(sin(sin(x)))) is cos(sin(sin(sin(x)))) · cos(sin(sin(x))) · cos(sin(x)) · cos(x) And in fact the average length of an integrand in the test set was 70 symbols with a standard deviation of 47 symbols; thus, a large fraction of the test examples had 120 symbols or so.
(Table 1 of Lample and Charton).
So what the comparison with Mathematica establishes is that, given a really long expression, which happens to have a much shorter, exact symbolic integral, LC is awfully good at ﬁnding it.
But that is a really special class.
One can certainly understand why the teams building Mathematica and so on have not considered this niche category of problem much of a priority.
Another point that does not seem to have been tested is whether LC may have been picking up on arbitrary artifacts of the diﬀerentiation process, such as the order in which parts of a derivative are presented.
For instance, the derivative of a three level composed function f(g(h(x))) is a product of three terms h′(x) · g′(h(x)) · f ′(g(h(x)).
Any particular symbolic diﬀerentiator will probably generate these in a ﬁxed order, such as the one above.
This particular choice of orderings will then be consistent thoughout the corpus, so LC will be trained and then tested only with this ordering.
A system like LC may have much more diﬃculty ﬁnding the integral if the multiplicands are presented in any of the ﬁve other possible orders.
The techniques that LC learns from BWD and FWD are very diﬀerent.
If LC is trained only on BWD and tested on problems in FWD, then running with a beam size of 1, it ﬁnds the correct solution to a problem in FWD only 18.9% of the time; with a beam size of 50, the correct solution 5
is among its top 50 candidates only 27.5% of the time.
Training it only on problems in FWD and testing it on problems in BWD it does even worse, with corresponding success rates of 10.9% and 17.2%.
The procedure for generating corpus example will not succeed in creating examples that combine features from FWD and BWD.
For instance, if f ′, f is a pair that would be naturally generated by FWD, and g′, g is a pair that would be naturally generated by BWD, then the sum f ′ + g′, f + g will not be included in the corpus, and therefore will not be tested.
7 Summary The fact that LC “beat” Mathematica on the test set of integration problems produced by BWD is certainly impressive.
But it would be oversimplifying to claim that LC is now better in general than Mathematica at symbolic integration or in solving symbolic ODEs; such a claim would be certainly false in some respects and unproven in others.
Even more oﬀthe mark would be any claim that LC renders hand-coded symbolic mathematics systems such as Mathematica obsolete.
On the contrary, the construction of LC is entirely dependent on the pre-existing symbolic processors developed over the last 50 years by experts in symbolic mathematics.
Moreover, as things now stand, extending LC to ﬁll in some of its gaps (e.g.
the simpliﬁcation problems described in section 3) would make it even less of a stand-alone system and more dependent on conventional symbolic processors.
There is no reason whatever to suppose that NN-based systems will supercede symbolic mathematics systems any time in the foreseeable future.
It goes without saying that LC has no understanding of the signiﬁcance of an integral or a derivative or even a function or a number.
In fact, occasionally, it outpts a solution that is not even a well- formed expression.
Finally LC, like the recent successes in game-playing AI, depends on the ability to generate enormous quantities of high-quality (in the case of LC, ﬂawless) synthetic labelled data.
In open-world domains, this is eﬀectively impossible.
Therefore, the success of LC is in no way evidence that deep learning or other such methods will suﬃce for high-level reasoning in real-world situations.
Acknowledgements Thanks to Fran¸cois Charton and Guillaume Lample for helpful discussions.
References Lample, Guillaume and Fran¸cois Charton, 2019.
“Deep Learning for Symbolic Mathematics” NeurIPS-2019.
https://arxiv.org/abs/1912.01412 Richardson, Daniel, 1969.
“Some undecidable problems involving elementary functions of a real variable.” The Journal of Symbolic Logic, 33:4, 514-520.
WolframAlpha, “Integrals that Can and Cannot be Done” https://reference.wolfram.com/language/tutorial/IntegralsThatCanAndCannotBeDone.html WolframAlpha, “Symbolic Diﬀerential Equation Solving” https://reference.wolfram.com/language/tutorial/DSolveOverview.html 6